---
layout: default
title: "Assignment 1: Web Service"
---

**Due:** Tuesday, Feb 11th by 11:59 PM

This is an **individual** assignment

Getting Started
===============

Download the following zipfiles and import them into Eclipse:

- [CS496\_Jetty.zip](CS496_Jetty.zip): the Jetty web application server and associated libraries (such as [Jackson](http://wiki.fasterxml.com/JacksonHome) for JSON)
- [CS496\_Assign01.zip](CS496_Assign01.zip): the implementation of the web service using Java servlets

The assignment consists of creating a web service to manage a basic inventory system.

Your Task
=========

The goal is to implement a RESTful inventory tracking web service. Clients can request information about the entire inventory, or a single item. Resource identifiers are assigned as follows:

-   "/inventory" refers to the entire inventory
-   "/inventory/Apples" refers to the item named "Apples" in the inventory

The data accepted and generated by the web service is encoded using JSON.

You can start the web service by running the **main** method of the **Main** class in the **edu.ycp.cs496.fruit.main** package.  The web service listens for requests on port 8081.  So, for example, a **GET** request to the URL

> http://localhost:8081/inventory

should return the initial inventory as a JSON array, which is

    [
      {
        "name": "Apples",
        "quantity": 3
      },
      {
        "name": "Oranges",
        "quantity": 7
      },
      {
        "name": "Pomegranates",
        "quantity": 55
      }
    ]

The starting point code includes a handler for the HTTP **GET** method which allows the client to access the entire inventory, or a single item.  So, for example, the URL

> http://localhost:8081/inventory/Apples

should return a single item as a JSON object:

    {
      "name": "Apples",
      "quantity": 3
    }

Your Task
---------

Handle HTTP **PUT** requests as follows:

-   If resource identifier is "/inventory", replaces the entire inventory with the inventory encoded in the JSON document found in the body of the request
-   If the resource identifier is "/inventory/*itemname*", replaces the item with the given item name, replacing it with the item that is encoded in the JSON document found in the body of the request

Handle HTTP **POST** requests as follows:

-   If the resource identifier is "/inventory", then a single item is ready from the JSON document encoded in the body of the request, and the item is *added* to the inventory.

Handle **DELETE** requests as follows:

-   If the resource identifier is "/inventory", all items are deleted from the inventory
-   If the resource identifier is "/inventory/*itemname*", the named item is deleted

Note that delete requests have no body.

"Persistence"
-------------

A real inventory web service would almost certainly use a database to store the inventory information.  However, in web applications and web services, it is generally useful to have a "persistence layer" abstraction that shields the application from knowledge of how data is being stored.

In this assignment, the **IDatabase** interface describes the persistence operations:

    /**
     * Persistence operations for fruit web service.
     */
    public interface IDatabase {
        /**
         * Get a single {@link Item} for the given item name.
         * 
         * @param itemName the item name
         * @return the {@link Item}, or null if there is no such item
         */
        public Item getItem(String itemName);
        
        /**
         * Get the current inventory (list of {@link Item}s.
         * 
         * @return the current inventory (list of {@link Item}s
         */
        public List<Item> getInventory();
    }

Because this is an interface, it can be implemented in a variety of ways.  For this assignment, it is implemented by a **FakeDatabase** class, which simply stores the items in the inventory in an **ArrayList**:

    /**
     * Implementation of the {@link IDatabase} interface that stores
     * objects using in-memory data structures.  It doesn't
     * provide actual persistence, but is useful as a proof
     * of concept.
     */
    public class FakeDatabase implements IDatabase {
        private List<Item> inventory;
        
        public FakeDatabase() {
            inventory = new ArrayList<Item>();
            
            // Populate initial inventory
            inventory.add(new Item("Apples", 3));
            inventory.add(new Item("Oranges", 7));
            inventory.add(new Item("Pomegranates", 55));
        }
        
        @Override
        public Item getItem(String itemName) {
            for (Item item : inventory) {
                if (item.getName().equals(itemName)) {
                    // return a copy
                    return new Item(item.getName(), item.getQuantity());
                }
            }
            
            // no such item
            return null;
        }
    
        @Override
        public List<Item> getInventory() {
            // return a copy
            return new ArrayList<Item>(inventory);
        }
    }

The **Database** class provides access to the object that implements the **IDatabase** interface:

    /**
     * Allow access to the singleton {@link IDatabase} implementation.
     */
    public class Database {
        private static final IDatabase theInstance = new FakeDatabase();
        
        /**
         * Get the singleton {@link IDatabase} implementation.
         * 
         * @return the singleton {@link IDatabase} implementation
         */
        public static IDatabase getInstance() {
            return theInstance;
        }
    }

The idea is that the single instance of **IDatabase** can be changed from being a **FakeDatabase** object to a real database at some future point without affecting any of the code that uses the persistence layer.  (You won't need to do this for this assignment.)

Testing
-------

You can use the **curl** program to test your implementation. (You can't use a web browser for testing because a web browser cannot generate a **PUT** request.)

Let's say that you have a text file called **replaceApples.txt** with the following JSON data:

    {
      "name": "Apples",
      "quantity": 16
    }

You can send this as the body of a **PUT** request using the following **curl** command:

    curl -X PUT -d @replaceApples.txt http://localhost:8080/inventory/Apples

Note that you must run the command from the directory containing **replaceApples.txt**.

Note that using the **-X POST** option will send a **POST** request.

Hints
-----

Note that the correct content type for JSON-encoded data (according to [RFC 4627](http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4627.txt)) is **application/json**.  So, when returning JSON data in an HTTP response, make sure to call

    resp.setContentType("application/json");

where **resp** is the **HttpServletResponse** object.

The Jackson library has a class called [ObjectMapper](http://fasterxml.github.io/jackson-databind/javadoc/2.2.0/com/fasterxml/jackson/databind/ObjectMapper.html) which transparently converts between POJOs ("Plain Old Java Objects") and JSON representations.  You can use the **JSON.getObjectMapper()** to get a singleton instance of the **ObjectMapper** class.

Reading an JSON object (corresponding to an instance of a model class, in this case an **Item** object) encoded in the body of an HTTP request:

    Reader reader = req.getReader();
    Item item = JSON.getObjectMapper().readValue(req.getReader(), Item.class);

Writing a Java object as a JSON object to the body of an HTTP response (assumes that **resp** is an **HttpServletResponse**):

    // Assume that item is a POJO representing an inventory item
    Item item = ...
    Writer writer = resp.getWriter();
    JSON.getObjectMapper().writeValue(writer, item);

Writing an array of Java objects as a JSON array (in this case, taking a **List** of **Item** objects, converting it to a Java array, and writing the Java array as JSON):

    List<Item> itemList = ...
    Item[] itemListAsArray = itemList.toArray(new Item[itemList.size()]);
    Writer writer = resp.getWriter();
    JSON.getObjectMapper().writeValue(writer, itemListAsArray);

Submitting
==========

Select the **CS496\_Assign01** project, then click the blue up arrow icon, and enter your Marmoset username and password when prompted.

Alternatively, export the **CS496\_Assign01** project to a zipfile, and upload the zipfile to Marmoset as **assign01**:

> [https://cs.ycp.edu/marmoset](https://cs.ycp.edu/marmoset)

<div class="callout">
<b>Important</b>: please do <b>not</b> submit the <b>CS496_Jetty</b> project as part of your submission.  Only submit <b>CS496_Assign01</b>.
</div>

<!-- vim:set wrap: ­-->
<!-- vim:set linebreak: -->
<!-- vim:set nolist: -->
